Yn ddiddorol.
A allwch chi ddweud eich anffaith a'i datblygu, fyddwch?
Dyma Doreen Lawson, 28.04.1940.
A ddweud mi am eich ymddygiad, a oedd eich bod wedi cael ei ddod, eich fater, eich mwyaf, eu cyfrifiadau, eich syblion, hynny?
Rwy'n ddod yn Tycock Road yn Ily, yn Cardiff.
Nid oedd yn cael eu cyfrifiad.
Roeddwn i'n ddod ar y mat, fel roeddwn i'n ddod.
Yna, dwi wedi cael ddwy broedd a ddwy broedd.
Mae fy enwog yn Joan.
Roedd hi wedi gael ei ffyrdd.
Mae fy broedd yn Colin a roedd hi'n gael ei ffyrdd, a dwi'n ei ddod.
Yna, Moira, fy sylfa, nid yn fwy fwy.
Mae hi'n dal.
Yna, fy hun a dwi'n gael broedd Wilfred sy'n byw yn Bridgend.
Mae fy mwm wedi gael gwerthfawr o Chivers,
o ddwy blynyddoedd am ddwy blynyddoedd,
a hefyd yn Bryntons Ferydd, yng Nghymru.
A fy broedd wedi gael gwerthfawr hefyd.
Yna,
fy tŷ, dwi ddim yn hapus gyda fy tŷ.
Mae fy mwm yn fwy fwy.
Mae hi'n gwneud rhywbeth i ni.
Roedd hi'n gweithio ar y graffta.
Roedd hi'n bwysig, mae fy mwm.
A roeddwn i'n hoffi bod hi'n cael ei gwybod.
Mae fy tŷ yn gweithio fel bod hi'n bric.
Roedd wedi cael ei fwy,
a roedd hi'n cael ei fwy,
oherwydd roedd hi'n cael ei fwy.
Mae fy mwm yn cael ei gwerthfawr.
Yna,
roedd nhw i'n mynd i mynd i ddwy,
ac roedd fy mynydd yn mynd i fyd.
Felly, roedd nhw'n mynd i Ffyrdd i Tygoc Road
i Ahtacres gydag Aneeli.
i ddod o'r ddod a'i gyrraedd. Yna, roeddwn i'n mynd i'n mynd i'r ddod, a roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ddod
i'r ddod yn 21. Felly roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ddod yn 21. Ond nid oes yn dda i'n mynd i'r ddod,
roedd fy fater yn gweithio ar y brifysgol yna, ar ôl y brifysgol, ac roedd hi'n angen
dda'n bryd yn Colgan. Tre fyddai yn dod o'r sgafoldi, ac roedd fy ddod yn y pwysig. Felly roeddwn i'n
gweithio yn llawer o ddod, yn llawer. Felly roedd yn dda i ddod o'r ddod, ac roedd hi'n angen
gweithio yn y brifysgol, yn sianol yn agonig yn y tîm. Yna, pan fyddwn i'n bryd yna,
roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ddod, roeddwn i'n bryd y ddod yn y bryd i'n bryd i'r ddod
yn 9 mlynedd. Mae fy fater yn cael ysgol, a fy môr yn mynd i'r ddod yn y
brifysgol oherwydd roedd hi'n cael ysgol yn y sciatica, yn ôl i fy ddad. Felly roedd
nhw'n mynd i'r brifysgol, roedd hi'n ystod ymlaen, roedd hi'n cymryd ei hunain, yn
bwysig ar fy ddad. Felly roeddwn i'n cael ysgol i'r ddod, rydyn ni wedi'i ddod, i ddod
yno, i ddod o'r ddod. Ond roeddwn i'n gweithio yn y ddod, felly roeddwn i'n gwneud
yn siwr ei bod yn ok. Mae fy môr yn ystod y ddod yn y brifysgol, yn cael ei
ddod i'r drefnu rah corpse, a bydd nhw'n cael tynnodi'r blwyddyn, nid mwy a dda iawn.
Y ffil o'r rheilfadd Dw »r haml guyd di tests yn pcwt a'i os 不yr yn mawl yn aelod.
Steinoriaeth yna un ar dda wrth prodded i.
Daeth gen i weithredu yn y Bacarysавr Afanna problemau y pryd fydda fi'n mynd ymarальнаяethi
Am du o'r hytr hwn, yn aletho please, beth y ni'n meddwl fel Marshall enw
y llok i'w gilydd, nuclear prenwiad ym Remmysg ac ang верch.
I went to Windsor Clive School first until I was 11, then I went to Herbert Thompson School,
failed the exam so I stayed in Herbert Thompson. I had great fun in there, it was great, I had a lot of friends there
and I do miss it, you know, miss my friends as well, but I do see them occasionally.
So then I left there when I was 14, my mum got my friend and myself a job in Littlewoods working Saturdays in Cardiff.
And I did the year there, finished school then at 15, I was called in the office in Littlewoods, I thought, oh I'm out,
but they wanted me to stay. But when I was working in the canty, the kitchen and tables, they wanted me to go down on the counters.
So I said, yeah, they didn't give my friend a job, only me. So I worked on the counters then for about two years,
enjoyed that because you were meeting different people all the time. And we had a one time when Llyes Parker came,
and Davy Crockett, the real one, came to Littlewoods, but we weren't allowed to say anything.
I'd seen him, but it was up to the other people to spot him and have a prize off him, you know, and that was exciting when that happened.
But then we saw this old man used to come down on a Monday morning with one arm, as we thought,
but the other arm used to come out of his coat and take the biscuits and the sweets off the counters.
They used to say to the bosses, leave him, we know what's going on, just leave him because he's put down an out thing, you know.
But that was that, so I left there then.
Before we go on, can I just ask you, were you sad to leave school, would you have liked to have stayed on?
No, I wanted to leave. I wanted to go out and earn money.
Why was that?
Well, we didn't have a lot of money. My mum and dad didn't have a lot of money, so I wanted to go out and pay my way to my mum.
And yeah, I was happy when I got that job and it was great. I had loads of friends there in the Littlewoods,
and then I left there then and I went to the Yvanna.
Right, so how old were you when you got to the Yvanna bakeries?
I must have been 18.
Do you remember what year that was?
I was born in 1940, so that's 58, wouldn't it? It would be 58.
I tried, I would have been there then, yeah, 58.
And I never looked back from there. I had great fun. I had great fun there.
One day the land went off for us to go for our break and the boy, John Trudgeon, always got up there first.
So I thought, this day he's not getting up there first.
So I tied his shoelaces to the table and he didn't know.
And the hoot went off and off I went and he was, I can't move.
I said, no, I know, I said, I'm getting first this time.
So I got up there and I got my cup and see my doughnut.
He said, I couldn't get a doughnut today. I said, it was your fault.
Then we used to have a line, I was on the Mazapan counter at first, that's where it was then.
No, I'm sorry, I was on the Dundee case, put the nets on when I first went.
And, um.
Do you remember how you got the job?
I went for an interview.
Right, can you tell me something about that?
Well, when I went for the interview and, of course now.
There was a nurse there as well and a few questions, you know, where did you work before and all this.
Well, of course I'd only had one job before.
So straight away, as soon as they asked me other questions, I said, right, the job was yours, start Monday.
Do you remember your first day there? Do you remember that?
Yes.
Can you describe that to me?
When I arrived there, it was a Monday and I thought, and there was another friend, Marian, started the same day as me.
Well, we didn't know this. We went in on the Monday, they gave us our overalls out here, brings the children out to put them on.
And, um, they brought us down onto the floor and, when I think about that job, went down on the floor and we were putting the cakes onto the trolleys, onto the racks.
So that was great, but you had to be quick as you could miss them coming off of the conveyor belt.
So, OK, I got on with that. So I was on after the weekend, Saturday morning we went in and he wanted us to do the Dundee cakes with my friend.
So we didn't know this, we were there putting his nuts on now, 12 o'clock, 1 o'clock and my husband, well, my boyfriend then, was outside waiting for me.
And it must have been about 4 o'clock and they took the charge on from upstairs, um, Josie Guy.
What are you doing here? Putting nuts on?
She said, well, you're not supposed to be here now, you should have gone at 12 o'clock.
I said, well, why didn't somebody tell us? I said, we knew, you know, we've only been here the week. Oh, she said, stop what you're doing, go and get your clock out and go.
Did you get paid for those then?
Yes, I made sure I clocked out. So I got paid for that.
Then, as the time was going by and I was getting more used to the job and I was on a machine then, putting the cakes on to slice them.
But you had to put a big roll of paper on, but it had to be straight because there was a magic eye on the paper.
And what's a magic eye?
It's just a mark on the paper which corresponds with the eye in the machine and that folds them right.
If you haven't got it right, waste of time.
So I always used to do mine and my friends and another one. And we did that.
Did you get trained at all in a val?
No, we just put on a job and just got on with it.
So you were straight in on the first day?
Straight in on a job straight away.
And did that and I was put on the angel cake on the end of the conveyor belt to put them on to the rack.
Of course, they were coming down thick and fast, weren't they?
So some was on the floor, some was on the rack.
So they were in stitches with me.
I said, stop the belt, stop everything. I said, we'll have to sweep up first.
I said, tell you what I've done, I said they're on the floor.
Right, OK. But I got used to it then, I could do it.
But when you first go on there, it's difficult, I tell you.
Because there's no space in between them.
They're coming down behind each other.
So anyway, I mastered that.
So then they wanted me to go on the creamery.
I thought, this is it now.
So you put the cream on.
So I thought, well I'd been watching the girl doing it, so I'm going to do it how she's done it.
And I was doing OK, because you've got to get it so it doesn't go off the edge of the thing.
Of course, you've got no space and you're like this all the time.
It's coming down the conveyor belt, so you've got to be quick.
So I mastered that.
Then I had to go out doing the fruitcake.
I was doing that.
And then I would—
I was a little mad.
When I think about then, there was Len Jones.
And I'd forgotten the other one.
They were the charge owners downstairs.
Well, you're not supposed to wear rollers in your hair, right?
Well, on a Saturday, I used to come in with rollers in my hair.
At the tribunal.
And Josie Guy, the one up in the office, used to come down.
So I'd be like, get them off.
Oh, I'd forgotten. I said, OK.
I'd go up and I'd take about three out.
Why weren't you supposed to wear rollers?
Because they could go in the cake.
You could lose one.
Right?
So that was that.
Then I'd come down now.
I'd be late. Sometimes the bus would be late.
So I'd creep down the stairs now and they're in the office, right?
They'd watch me on my machine.
And I'd put a Madeira cake through.
I said, come on, Kate.
You want to eat some cake?
Now I've done some cake for our breakfast.
And out comes the other two from the office.
What time is this?
Oh, it's about eight o'clock.
Why?
You're supposed to be here half past seven.
Oh, I said, but the bus wasn't there for me.
Right.
I had the cake, I had the cake, I had the cake, I had the cake.
So when they went upstairs then we all had a feast.
I was, as I told you, the ringleader.
But I'd been here about a year then.
Yes.
So tell me, there's a few things I wanted to ask you.
You talked about the uniform.
Did they supply it?
They supplied it and they washed them.
And then we'd come in the next day, the next day.
And you'd go in the office and you'd see what size you were.
You'd just take them off.
The turban she did herself.
Right.
So you weren't given a turban?
We were given one, but we washed it ourselves.
Oh, I see.
And describe the uniform for me.
Colour and stuff like that.
It was white.
White with the buttons down and then you tied the belt round.
Then the turban was white and you just tied it.
All your hair had to be under.
All your hair had to be under and very pretty.
And the shoes you wear, whatever shoes you want then, you know.
Because it didn't bother.
But no...
Rings and things.
No nail polish.
So that was that.
No nail polish, no rollers.
Definitely no rollers, but I did do it.
Because my friend used to do my hair then, lunchtime for me.
So I'd get him in the rollers ready for her to do.
But I was a devil.
And this one day, now Len Jones, he said, right, he said,
You're not doing your job properly.
Which I was, but he was messing about.
He said, you're going in the washroom.
Oh, okay.
So I go to the washroom now.
Well in there, there's all the foreign women working in there, right?
Well they haven't got a clue, a lot of English anyway.
So what it is, they're washing all the tins in these great big tubs.
So they show me what to do now, these things.
So I was leaving the cleaners in and putting the dirty ones out.
And I can see the boss laughing like hell outside this window.
So, and they were going, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, like this.
Oh, yeah, okay.
And I still do it the other way.
Right, come on, Doryn, out.
And that was my way of getting out.
So I go back on my own job then.
So you said there were foreign workers.
Where did they come from, the women?
Were they women?
Men and women.
In the washroom.
Yeah, yeah, they were like Pakistani ones and Indians and things like that, you know.
So they did employ that type of people, but that's where they were down there.
And then another time, right, you go in the fruit room.
Right, off it goes.
Now it goes in the fruit room now and there's a glass window, a little glass window.
And then there was Chinese in there.
So show me what to do.
And you've got, they're putting the fruit in the two, what do you call them, hops.
Like they come through an autoconveyor belt.
And then they go into a big tub at the back.
Well, you've got to take all the stalks off.
Sometimes you get stalks that will come through the machine.
I leave the stalks on and take the currents out.
And I thought, this is great.
No, no, no, no, no, they've stopped the machine.
No, no, no.
Oh, yeah, okay.
Started back up.
I'd let a few go through.
Then I let the stalks go through them.
Because they've got to go through the barrel again, haven't they?
It was wicked.
Was that just to get out of doing those jokes?
No, just for the laugh.
Because I knew they were watching me.
Ah, right.
So I'd come out to there then after about an hour, back onto my job.
They said, you're a little soon, so are you.
I said, why?
He said, you knew you were doing wrong.
I said, well, don't put me in there then.
So I'd go on with my other job.
Then on a Saturday then, on a Friday and a Saturday, we'd be by the ovens.
And as the cakes had come out of the ovens, put them onto the belt.
No, somebody else was putting them onto the trays.
We were just checking they were okay.
We'd have a good sing song.
We'd be singing away, enjoying ourselves.
You know, it was actually great.
So do you remember, was it the music, was it radio?
It was the radio.
Do you remember what it was, what the programmes were?
Oh, gosh, it was all music programmes, so I couldn't tell you really what it was.
No.
Do you remember what the songs were?
Well, it was Lulu, there was The Beatles.
No, not The Beatles.
There was Manfred Mann.
Oh, and I tell you, Frankie Vaughan.
I used to love Frankie Vaughan.
And lots of all the fifties it was.
And did you know all the words?
I knew all the words then.
I could sing along and I was brilliant.
Brilliant.
I can still, if a rebel comes on, I can sing it word to word.
But when I get in my head, I can't.
When I hear it on the, which I got on here, I know word to word.
But, um.
So did the music play all day?
Yeah, until we told them to turn it off.
And then we'd say, right, we've had enough now, turn it off.
But that was after a couple of hours.
You know, we'd have our breaks come down and it'd still be on for us, you know.
And then, um.
So tell me, um, what, the smell of the factory, could you describe that to me?
It was, um, it was very cakey, obviously.
It was, you can smell them being cooked like you would at home.
You could smell the cakes being cooked and it was absolutely lovely.
You didn't have to come home and change your clothes.
Because it wasn't on your clothes, because you had the overalls.
So, you know, it was great and your hair was covered, so you didn't have to wash your hair all the time.
So was the smell nice?
Oh no, it was a lovely smell.
Not too overpowering?
No, it made you feel hungry, really.
As you know, because I was getting up the cakes.
So tell me, you used to come to work then from Ely and you said about the bus.
Were the buses, was it public transport or were they laid on by the company?
Public.
You used to get off the bus every morning and get off at the bus station and walk over the bridge and under the bridge.
So there you were then.
And you'd do that at seven o'clock in the morning.
And sometimes that bridge was, um, flooded.
So you'd have to walk up and get off the railway and down the other side.
And you had to be very quick.
You know, there'd be a couple of us, I wouldn't do it on my own.
And we used to do that.
And, um...
So, you were supposed to be in work at half seven?
Yes.
And so you clocked in, did you?
I used to clock in, so I'd lose the time, obviously, because I was late.
But sometimes I'd work a bit over, because you were allowed to.
But then very often they'd ask me to go in at six o'clock.
And I used to be terrified because round there, there was always a lot of rapes in that street around that area.
So I'd get off the bus now, and of course you've got to go under that bridge.
My eyes are everywhere.
So I did that a few times.
And, um...
I thought, no more, I'm not doing that again.
You know, it's okay if you live near, but I was too far.
Why were you asked to go in at six o'clock?
Why would that be?
Because they would have so many orders.
It was Marks and Spencer's we were working for.
It was their cakes.
And there's so many Marks and Spencer's, as you know.
So we had to cater for all of them.
So we'd have a big order in, and had to get it out.
So there was lots of... I mean, what were your usual hours?
Half past seven, so, um...
I think it was five o'clock.
That's pretty long anyway, isn't it?
Oh, it was long hours.
We did have a quarter of an hour for break, morning and afternoon.
And an hour for lunch.
And that was it.
And, um, but there was a chance for overtime, was there?
Always. There was always a chance for overtime if you wanted it.
Which I did, because I was getting married.
So it helped me, you know.
Did they pay more for overtime, or was it...?
You used to get time and a half for the weekend, and only for the week.
So I'd do a weekend if I could.
Not a Sunday, a Saturday now.
And a Saturday was overtime.
Anytime.
But we went in on a Saturday on the first day, not knowing we shouldn't have been there.
Like fools.
So, um, what were the wages like then?
Tell me what your wages were when you went there first.
Oh my goodness now.
I'd say about £5 or £5 something.
About £7 something if you did overtime.
Was that good?
It was good then, because you could do a lot with it.
My mum used to have £2, and I'd have the rest.
That was a lot of money then?
That was a lot of money.
But I used to put it away, see, because of getting married, as I said.
And, um, yeah, I think about £5, £7 if you worked overtime, sometimes, you know.
Then when I got married, you went up again, then, see.
Every year it sort of went up.
Yeah.
Inflation, you know.
But, um, yeah, it was good, you know.
Apart from putting it away, what else did you use to do with your money?
Um, I never used to drink.
That was after my boyfriend.
Um, we'd go out.
Oh, we used to go to the Pavlovah dancing in Crantham, or the Cairnads in Cattays.
Or then I used to go roller skating in Barry, or roller skating in Cattays.
Down there.
And that was what we used to do.
Go down to the parks, go for walks, you know.
So where was the Pavlovah in Cattays?
Do you know, um, oh, Radio Craft is a shop.
Oh, yeah.
At Tesco's.
Well, where Tesco's is.
Where Tesco's is.
That's where it used to be up there, and you had to go upstairs to it.
Oh, it was lovely.
Boys went inside, girls the others.
And sarsaparalla and coke for it to drink, you know.
Oh, it was lovely.
I used to love that, and driving away.
I was going to say, what kind of music, so it was rock and roll?
Rock and roll, yeah.
Do you remember any of the songs you used to dance to?
Oh, gosh, yeah.
Well, yeah.
Um, Treadin' the Dreamers.
Actually, I'm trying to think of the boy that used to come there, aren't I?
Oh, goodness.
Sheridan.
Um, he's still going now, actually.
Oh, God.
Billy Sheridan.
I know of something Sheridan.
His name was, and he used to be the little band in there, like, you know, in the pub.
We used to dance to.
It wasn't records, it was live.
A band, yeah.
Yeah.
Rock and roll band.
Tommy Sheridan?
He should have been.
I know it's Sheridan, but I can't think of his first name.
What about, um, Kennads?
Where was that in?
That was in, um, in Catays.
Where was that in Catays?
I'm trying to think now, because we used to wait under the bridge,
but come over to Ely Bridge and wait on that bridge there,
and get the bus to take you to the Kennads.
I'm trying to think where exactly that was.
Oh, goodness.
It was on a corner, it was.
It was only about three or four stops away from there,
and we'd all go there.
There'd be a lot of us.
And then you said you went roller skating in Badie.
Do you remember where that was?
Yeah.
Do you know where the C-Print is?
You've got the shops, you've got your grass, the road,
and the shops there.
On the end, up the stairs, we used to go.
Lovely.
And then the other one was in Catays then, and that was down,
that was only a few stops away.
Good, I just, I could find it now.
Oh, we used to have some fun.
Glad you could do them.
Oh, yeah.
I was never still, I was always on the go.
You know, when I think about it now,
well, today you've got time to do it.
But, you know, it was great.
I enjoyed my youth thoroughly.
Were you unionised in Ivana Bakeries?
No.
Nobody a member of the union?
Do you remember any disputes there at all?
No, not what I would say.
No, no.
No.
Was it a kind of, were they good employers then?
They were brilliant, absolutely brilliant.
They looked after their staff.
Like I said, every year we'd have a dinner and dance.
And where was the dinner?
That was in the Angel Hotel.
In the Angel Hotel.
Every year, and it was beautiful.
A meal put on for us.
Dance after, we'd be there till about 12 o'clock.
The coach'd take us home.
So it was all set up.
We used to look forward to that every year.
You heard him, you dress, let's go.
What about other social occasions?
Tell me about the, how many women and how many men worked in the Ivana?
More women than men.
But there was a lot of men as well because of the Evans.
Because women didn't work on the Evans.
And upstairs then, they used to do the,
these were upstairs, oh they set the cakes.
Like we did the slab cakes, they did the little cakes upstairs.
They did the packing of them.
These had come down from somewhere and they packed them.
And they dared me one day to go down the slope.
They had to send the stuff straight down and they used to go down along the conveyor belt.
The conveyor belt to the rollers, to the drivers.
And they'd put them in the van.
So there was this thing that it had to go through.
If there was anything in it, it would ring.
So then they dared me to go down there and into the loading bay.
Don't dare to ring.
So I did, I laid down on this thing.
I went down there.
I'd forgotten about the rollers.
So I went across the road, bump bump bump bump bump bump now.
And who should be there was Max and Spencer.
There's two of them, there's only two little men there were.
I'll always remember that.
And they looked at me and I looked at them and I thought, that's it, I've got the sack.
Well they were in stitches.
They said, well, did you come down there?
I said, it's easy.
I just laid back, just come down.
They said, well, don't do it again.
And I didn't.
I used to really enjoy it.
I had some good friends there.
It was great.
So then I left to get married.
I was just going to ask you before you go on to that.
What about the camaraderie who said you had good friends there?
Did you used to go out with the girls as well?
Oh yes, yes, yes, I got with them.
And then another friend then needed to do my hair.
They didn't need a boyfriend.
We used to make a foursome and go out.
And it was great.
So there was a good feeling?
Oh yes.
You didn't mind getting up in the morning and going to work.
Because you knew it was going to be fun.
Your friends were there and whatever.
It was never a dull day.
I don't think so because I used to make it a good day.
I mean, you know a lot of us like.
So the work was quite separate, was it between the men's work and the women's work?
No, because we had some men working with us.
Like I said, I was on the Mazza plant thing at one time.
And John Strudgen was there and he was outside and I was his side.
So I tied his laces up so he couldn't get up there first.
There was quite a few rounds of packing.
You know, on the machines as well as myself.
But there was more women than the men doing it.
What was the relationship between the men and the women?
We all got on great.
I mean, we used to go off for days, a load of us.
Meet up in Barry.
Meet up in other places, you know, Pothco.
We'd see you there at a certain time.
And there'd be about 12 of us.
Did you go for trips from the factory kind of thing?
No, no, no.
They never had any like that.
Why do you think the men were the bakers?
Why did the men do the Evans?
I think it was a man's job then.
It was more of a man's job than a woman's job.
Because the stuff that came out there was very, very hot.
If you worked by then, like I said, we did when it was coming out.
And it was very, very hot.
And you worked there in the summer.
No.
But they did that.
The women never did that part.
Did they used to bake at a different time to you as well?
No.
They were baking all day.
They didn't bake in the middle of the night?
No, no.
No, I don't think so.
No, it was in the day.
Because it was always baking when we were there.
You know.
But like I said, the men were great.
We used to get on with them, have a bit of fun, you know.
Everything was clean fun.
Those days.
You could have a bit of fun with them and it was great.
It was nice going at work in there.
Yeah.
What about holidays and things?
Did you have paid holidays?
Yes, we had a fortnight off.
And I kept mine for when I got married.
So you could choose?
Yeah.
Oh yeah, you choose when you want it.
And yeah, that's right.
We used to choose our own holidays.
After April, obviously.
And go and tell them when you wanted.
They'd book it in and say, yeah, that's okay.
And we'd go off and then come back two weeks later.
So, you know, it was great.
No problem.
What about holidays?
We used to do...
I think we saw the Monday off.
No, I don't think we did.
No, I don't think it was around then.
You know, we had the bank holidays, but we...
Of course you got me now, haven't you?
I don't know, I should imagine we did.
I can't think, now that we did or didn't.
I'd say we must have had them off.
Because they were good to work for, so I should imagine we did.
I mean, Christmas time we didn't work, obviously.
But it wasn't open.
What about the facilities and the factories?
Were they okay? Were there conditions?
Yes, they had a sick room.
We had a lovely canteen.
You can buy food there if you wanted to or bring your own, it was up to you.
And you'd go there every Friday to collect your wages.
You'd be there every Friday to collect your wages.
A couple of goes at a time.
And yeah, it was lovely, you know.
Yeah, it was huge, absolutely huge.
I had my 21st birthday there.
And my birthday was in April.
I was getting married in October, so my mum couldn't afford to do two parties.
So I said, well, I'll get married then instead, you know.
So, unknowing to me, I went in on my birthday.
I was called up to the staff room.
I thought, oh, what's happening?
When I got up there, there was a great big two-tier cake.
Two brothers had made for me, because they knew I wasn't having anything.
And a lot of presents up there for me.
And I thought I'd have to get a taxi home that day in balloons.
So, you know, that was a really surprise.
I mean, that's how good they were, you know.
Now when I left, I had a lot of stuff off them.
And when I left, they collected, you know.
So it was really good.
Apart from that, what were the perks at working there?
Could you buy cheap cakes?
Yes, yes.
Downstairs, you can buy them down there.
And, oh, half price probably.
Half the price, maybe less again.
They had plenty then.
They used to bring the stuff down from Ryska.
I think they had it up in Ryska.
So you can buy smaller cakes as well, like, you know, puddings and stuff.
So we can do that.
So, you know, we had the perks that way.
So that was good.
Besides what we had in between.
So how long were you there altogether?
18, 19, 20, 21.
That was three years.
Then I left and I got married.
I think I didn't go back straight there.
Where did I go?
Oh, goodness.
So you left to get married, did you?
Yes, in 1961.
Yes.
October 1961.
So why did you leave when you got married then?
Is that what people did?
Oh, you're giving you notice in?
No, what I mean was you could have worked.
Oh, I could have carried on.
Yeah, I could have carried on.
But he didn't want me to work after we were married.
Right, I see.
So I thought, well, hang on, that's right.
He didn't want me to work after we were married.
He said, I'll keep it.
He was getting about £14 a week then.
And then we had our own house in Arl.
So that was in Lambrammy.
It was a lovely house there.
Were you sorry to leave though?
I was.
I can't think what I did.
Oh, I know what I did.
My sister said, come and work with me in Lionites,
in Sanatorium Road down Canton.
And that's where they make music boxes.
All right.
Oh, God, I went down there.
Oh, what a place.
It was horrible.
And all I could smell was the glue.
And I was there for about two months, if that.
Maybe a little bit more.
And I thought, I can't stand this.
So I went out and I went down to Yvonne and asked her if I could have.
Yeah, perfect.
Said yes, come back.
And I had my job back and I stayed there then
until another two years.
Maybe.
I think no.
So what did you say to your husband then?
You said, oh, I've got, I mean, I'm just asking
because you left because he wanted you to leave.
Yeah.
But you went back to work, so.
He didn't mind then.
He realised what he said was wrong because I was home on my own.
Right.
To no any children then.
And I went back to Yvonne then for about a year, year and a half,
something like that.
I left there.
Then I went to.
Did you leave then because you were expecting?
No, that was at the cigar factory.
Oh, right, OK.
Can I just ask you, before we leave the
Yvonne altogether,
what was the age of the women working there?
I mean, were they, were you all young?
All ages.
Were they married?
Did they have children?
Yeah, they were married with children.
Some were young like myself.
A lot of us, that's where we used to sit together.
Oh yeah, there was a lot.
A lot of them.
We got on with the married women,
the married men,
the single men.
We all sort of clicked together.
It was really, it was like a family, really.
When you think, you know, when I think back on it.
And then we all
hit it off.
There was never no animosity there.
So why did you leave for the second time then?
I'm trying to think
why I left there.
Of course I've got
a shot on the brain now, haven't I?
I'm going to stop.
So,
why did you leave
the Yvonne?
Because my sister said she can
get a job for me in the Goaman
cinema with more money.
Because I was
getting married.
I was married.
Okay, so I
thought she got the job for me.
I packed in my job, went down there
and they said, no there's no job here, we haven't got any
jobs and we can't have two sisters
working together.
Oh, why was that?
Sounds like a bit of an excuse
there. It was. There was jobs there
but they wouldn't give it, they said, because
you don't allow two sisters working together.
So I thought, oh right, so I'm out of
a job. Sorry and all that.
Then I got a job in
Vaughan's Laundry.
I was in there for a couple of months.
I went from there to another laundry
round the corner but can't remember
the name of it. I wasn't there
long. I left there
and I went to the cigar
factory.
So can you tell me,
did you have to have an interview for the...
I had to have an interview to get into the cigar
factory.
I think I worked there
about
a year, year and a half
and then I became pregnant.
Okay, so should we
go back to just when you
first went there? Yeah, when I first went there
I
got the job
straight away.
Started on the Monday.
That must have been
sixty
five
about sixty six
I would say.
And
I turned up for work on the Monday.
I had to go into a training room
as they call it. Training what to do
on the machines. I was on
the end part of the machine that
actually made the cigar.
There was a girl on one end, she used to
put the, doesn't matter if there was a hole in the leaf
but there wasn't to be
a hole in the leaf in my side.
So
we were doing that.
So I wasn't in there long. I come out of that.
Sally, can I ask you about that?
Why was it important there wasn't a
hole in the leaf?
Because you
because of selling it, if there was a hole
in it, it's
no good. But what happened
if there was a hole, the girl
used to come round, when we used to fill our hopper
up, she'd come round and take them and
check them and bring them back
if they had holes
in them. And then we'd redo
them. And then
start from scratch again.
So were they the leaves that wrapped
the cigar rather than? Yes.
You had a machine and you
stretched it on the machine.
There was air coming up in the machine. Stretched
it on the machine and it would come
and cut it.
Then it would slide along and wrap it.
Then it would go into the hopper.
The hopper. Then it would fill up them.
Then you'd stop your machine then.
The girl would come and take them away, put another
hopper there, start again.
What's a hopper?
When you
come to the end
of wrapping
the cigars,
it goes into what they call a hopper.
It fills it up.
It starts from the bottom and it fills up.
There'd be a couple of hundred in there.
They'd take that away then
and
sort them out and bring another
one and start again.
So is this what you did from day one?
From day one, yeah.
But they trained you for this?
They trained me for that and I came out to train and they put me on a machine.
I had a machine.
The more
you do, the more money
you got.
It was like piece work but it wasn't.
So if you can fill as many hoppers
as you can, you get more money.
Of course there was a lot of them
being there a lot longer than me so they were getting
in a lot more than me.
But I was working my way up to it.
Do you remember what your wages were?
Like your basic wage
and stuff like that?
When you went there?
I could think about
£20, £30, something like that.
Let me think.
Hang on. That was in 66.
The wages weren't big then.
I can't remember.
Because we had our house
and he was in about
£15 to £17. I'd say about £12, £12 to £15.
That's without overtime.
But I didn't work any overtime there.
Was that good money?
Well it was good money then because it went a long way.
But
now you couldn't do it obviously.
I'd come out of training.
I went on my own machine
doing fine.
I learned to do it fast
and the other girl on the other side had to go fast
and I had to keep up with her.
She'd put the leaf on her side
if he had a hole in it, but not a big hole.
It only had to be a little hole.
Then come over to me
and I would put
it would come over to me
and my leaf didn't have to have a hole.
It was a top leaf.
Then as I say it went into the hopper
then it got filled and that went.
You can fill about
ten of them a day.
If you're quick.
I think I used to get about nine.
So do you remember
what you were paid per hopper?
No, it didn't work like that.
It was just
if you
the other girls were more faster than me
because it'd be no use.
I'd just come out of training
so I was building myself up.
Of course I'd become pregnant then.
After about a year I was there
and you were only allowed to work six and a half
months then. You couldn't work any
longer than that. Any job.
Any job.
So once you knew you were pregnant
yes? Yes, six and a half months
after that then you had to leave.
Any job you were in.
So what did that take you
up to?
That took me right up to about
sixty
sixty-eight. Sixty-seven.
Sixty-seven because I had
it in sixty-eight.
Right.
You told me
about when you found you were pregnant.
You had to go up to the
To get my
last wages. Yes. Upstairs.
Yes.
And wait outside this window
thing and then tell them you know
they give you your wages.
But then I was surprised when I went up there
how many people were pregnant.
All six and a half months as I was myself.
And
I'd seen
one of them in the hospital when I went in for mine.
She was having hers.
But I don't know where the others had theirs
too. Whether they were
later or earlier they had theirs I don't know.
So how many of you
worked in the
cigar factory? Oh gosh I wouldn't.
There was quite a lot.
Because when I think when you used to finish
there'd be
coaches outside
buses sorry outside to take them to different
parts of Cardiff.
Some used to go off to
Pyneth, some
Barry, some Cardiff.
Were they paid by the company?
The buses? Yeah.
Oh I don't know because I never managed to get on one.
I don't even manage to get on one.
I was always
getting out. See the ones that have been
using you out to do it.
Off the machine and out.
Well I'd be off the machine in and get my coat on
and take my stuff off and get my coat on.
The bus is gone. So I'd wait
for the normal bus to come up
then.
So people used to come, women used to
come from all around? Yeah. Up the valleys?
Yeah and the valleys, yeah.
Yeah they'd come from there.
There was quite a lot.
There was a couple of hundred people working
there, easy downstairs and upstairs.
Quite a few.
And were they mainly women?
A lot of women but there was a lot of men
maintenance.
The machines.
But it was women on? It was mostly
on the machines. It was all women.
Yeah. Yeah. And so they
were mainly women in the factory?
More women than men. Yeah. Yeah there was a lot
more women than men.
A lot more.
But I enjoyed it there. It was great but
I enjoyed the Havana better.
Did you? Yeah.
I had more friends down there.
Probably because I was down there longer than
I was in the cigar factory.
And in the cigar factory we didn't have time
to mess around.
It was a serious
job. Which fair enough that's great.
It was a really serious job.
So you went there, did your job
and that was it.
Clock off and home.
Yeah when did you start work there?
You know what time in the morning?
About seven.
Same time. Yeah about five o'clock
again.
And then
What about breaks?
We had a break in the morning, a quarter of an hour
the same. And the afternoon.
And I think we had
three quarters an hour for lunch then.
In that one.
It wasn't long.
But some
people never used to go for the break.
They'd have it downstairs when the
supervisor wasn't looking.
And keep working.
To get more money.
I thought well I'm not doing that.
What about uni farm? Did you
have a uni farm there?
Or overall or something?
Yeah what was that like?
I think it was my own.
No hat.
Just overall over your clothes.
Yeah I'm sure it was my own colour.
The belt.
And that was given to you by the factory again?
Yeah. Did they used to watch them
again?
Yes.
Yes they used to watch them.
Like I say this fella worked there
and he lived down the road from us.
Well across the other side of the road.
And he said well look I'll give you
and I can't think of
any now. He lived in every morning.
We'd pay him
some petrol money. Yeah that's fine.
And you can guarantee
time would come and he wouldn't be down by the shops
waiting for us. We'd go
and knock him up.
We'd be there now. We'd be late.
Well if you're late
it was very regimental. If you were late
you were called, you were in the middle of
the floor
with the charge under
the man. I've forgotten his name now. He was very
strict.
Why are you late?
Well I couldn't put the blame on that fella all
the time. Well I said the bus was late.
Oh right.
Same excuse.
Right you've lost your
machine so you can go up by there
and give them the leaves
when they need them. Or go
there and pack up that lot.
You know you're shoved anywhere.
For the day.
And I used to hate that because I used to
love to be on my machine.
You've lost your
piecework as well did you? Yeah.
For the day. Yeah. Yeah you wouldn't
get that then.
So you know I used to go mad
over that you know. I mean
it was alright for him. He wasn't on
that type of work so he was just the maintenance.
So if he was late it didn't matter.
But with us we lost our machines.
So it did to us
so we lost out on a lot
because he was late a lot.
So in the end I said right
we're going on the bus. Of course I got pregnant
then so he said no he said
I'll bring you and take
you back he said.
Did he mend his ways time wise?
A little bit. A little bit.
Not a lot. I said I can't
rush around. I said no.
I've taken my time.
So be early. Be up by the shops.
Once or twice he was.
Were
were people unionised
in Havana?
I'm sure they were
not the Havana. Oh sorry.
I think they were in Freemans.
I'm sure it was.
There was no dispute
when I was there though.
Were you a member of the union? No.
You could if you wanted to.
Yes I see.
Do you think
they were good employers in Freemans?
Oh yeah. I knew it was
a good job. Don't get me wrong.
That's the type of job I would have liked if I was
younger. Like you know
starting off and got into
it and I could work my way up.
If you'd stayed there could you have
become a supervisor? Probably
because I did
in the dry cleaners when I was in the Alford
dry cleaners I'd become a supervisor there.
But it's awful hard to work
with your friends and all of a sudden
you become a
supervisor and you've got to tell them what to
do. Well I
had a good talk to them. I said
if I tell you, you do it.
And it was okay.
They were good.
But with the
cigar factory
I should have managed to be there quite a few
years before you had a
went up.
But then they had the cameras in
this one too and they asked me to go in
the change you know.
What do you call it?
Where you learn.
The training room.
If I'd go in there and
work on the machines when I film
and I said yeah, there's
about four of us in there I think.
And we
were working out asking us questions you know
and the supervisor
go slower.
You're supposed to be training.
Of course you get carried away.
You're so used to going like this all the time.
They're just supposed to go like that.
I'm just like that.
And I couldn't do it. I did do it.
But in between.
But the cameras were there for about an hour or so.
Maybe more than that.
But I don't know where it went.
Do you know
what they were filming?
Were they filming a training video?
It was just a training.
I should imagine a documentary
on the training in the cigar factory.
But the cameras
were rolling all the time.
And do you remember what year
that was?
It's either 61
or 60.
1960 or 61.
No, no, no, no, no.
I had the baby then.
I was just getting married then.
No, I'm not now.
You said you were in the 90s.
I had the baby in...
It could have been
97 or 96.
67 or 66.
I don't know where I am.
So, do you know
whether it was a BBC
film or?
I don't know. See, because I was so busy
doing it.
I didn't have time to ask anybody.
I knew they'd say they didn't know themselves.
But they must know.
But where it went, I really
don't know.
I'd love to find it.
I'd really love to find it. I don't know, I get around
that now.
I'd
find it.
Whether it's still going.
If you find it, let me know.
I will.
So,
so you...
Sorry.
Oh, can I just ask you before
you went off
pregnant.
What were the conditions like
in the factory?
Oh, they were good. They were good.
There was no bother there.
Did you have a canteen and things?
Yeah, a lovely canteen.
Yeah, we had that.
And plenty of food.
It was nice.
It was lovely.
And did I ask you
this? You think they were good employers
then? They were, yeah.
They looked after their staff.
Would you say it was a happy workforce?
Oh, yes. Yeah.
It was because
I mean, I would have liked to have been a bit
longer to get to know them more.
Could you
speak when you were on the machine? Could you talk?
Oh, yes. Yeah, we were talking.
Yeah, you can talk to the next one as well.
As long as you make sure you're
not putting any holes
in the stuff, you know, and you get
so many out of a leaf.
Sometimes you get six, sometimes you get seven,
sometimes you get five. Depending
on the leaf you can put the leaf all
shapes and get what you can
out of it.
What about music then? Did you used to? No.
No music?
I don't think so.
Can't remember music.
Yeah.
What about the smell of the factory?
Did it smell of tobacco?
It did because when I came home I changed my clothes.
And I'd
have a shower or a bath, whatever it was
then.
And then when I was
pregnant I couldn't stand the smell
of it then. It was making
me feel nauseated a lot.
So I managed
to stay there for the six and a half months
and I was glad to go then for that reason.
But
other than that,
it was great and it was clean.
It was a clean place.
Very clean.
What about
the perks of
working there? I never smoked
or I never bothered.
I've been lucky with my husband, I never
smoked.
I never smoked, my children don't smoke.
And I definitely wouldn't bring any
cigarettes by them for anybody.
If they want to kill themselves they can do it to themselves.
Even when I go to Spain
I won't bring any back.
A lot of people
have asked me to bring tobacco or cigarettes back
for them. No.
Anything else brought that.
So did you, was that
it then when you left and had a
baby, you didn't go back to the
cigar factory? No.
The only time I went back to work was when
I had the three children
and we moved into
the bungalow from the house
that we had in our room and we bought a bungalow
on the Newport Road and
we wasn't there long and my husband
worked in the rover works then.
They went on strike.
And they were on strike for
quite a couple of months.
So I thought, well I can't have this.
So I got a job in the nursing home.
Which was a couple of days
a couple of doors up from where I lived.
So I worked there.
But in the meantime I'd
phoned the restaurant which was down the road.
If there was any jobs
and there wasn't they said, well give me your phone number
and if something comes up we'll phone you.
But I was in the nursing home for about
six months, the phone goes, there's
a job for me. So I thought,
oh right, okay.
So what I did, I had the two jobs. So I was
going up there a quarter to nine instead
of nine o'clock to the nursing home.
Finishing a quarter to twelve.
Running down the road
to start a twelve o'clock and my other job.
Finish here
about three or four o'clock.
Come back home, do a meal.
And go back about
six o'clock then until about two o'clock
in the morning. And I'd be doing that.
For a couple of years.
And he
got his job back then so I gave up
the one job and I stayed in the restaurant.
For twenty-one years then.
What about Elks
Biscuits? You told me.
I was in there. I wasn't in there
for long. I stayed about
eight months.
And when did you work there?
That was
That was before
I got married.
Oh, it was before you got married?
No, no. Wait a minute now.
Oh, yeah.
I'm sure it was.
Because I was getting
I was married.
Because I was thinking of the bus now.
I was getting a bus to go to Llanrummy.
Yeah, I was married.
So it must have been
when I finished the
Yrvanna then.
Between the Yrvanna and
the cigar factory. Yeah.
How did that compare to the Yrvanna?
Nothing.
The Yrvanna was the best.
You didn't like Elks, did you?
No, no, I didn't like it at all.
Was there mainly women
working there again? There was a lot of women
and a lot of men but one of the men was
very, very bitchy.
Not to me, but to a lot of
the girls. But if he
started on me I would have,
you know, better
than that. No, I didn't like her.
Was it
the employers or was it
the conditions?
What happened, I fainted
up. We had to work
upstairs, up the,
it wasn't upstairs but the steps were to go up to work
on the top thing. And it was very,
very hot. It was a hot summer.
And
I fainted up there.
Well the girls decided to go on strike
because of
the heat up there. They shouldn't
go up there unless they give us something to drink or something.
Well,
if they did, the boss come down and
get back on your jobs. Get back
on your jobs and don't strike. You're not going on strike.
Get back on. And they changed the way they went back on
their jobs. So nothing was
done. And I think that's why I left.
Yeah.
Yes. So it was really
bad conditions. That was bad.
That was bad. I did not like that at all.
So I'd never go back
there. The only places
I'd go back really is,
well not now, but
at that time, was the Havana
or the Alfa drive
cleaners. That's
when I had a lot of friends and I
messed around a lot
in my jobs. You know,
it was great. It was great.
We all were knit family.
It was lovely.
In the both of them. And I still
see friends now
from both of them. Do you?
Yeah. Do you see
them quite regularly?
Do you go out with them?
No, not so much. I had my
70th birthday last year.
Last year, three years ago now.
And my
daughters dug up some of my friends.
And I
didn't know. I thought I was going to my other
friends from my
other job.
years.
And then I was doing a surprise party.
So I managed to get a card with 45
on on this day now.
So I knew it
was my birthday then,
that weekend.
And I thought, well, they were taking
me out on the Saturday. So they said,
no, they said, don't worry, we'll take you out on the Sunday.
So I bought two dresses.
One to go to my friends, and one
to go out with my family for
my birthday. Well,
I put the one that I
put the card and first on for the Saturday.
I guess down and out it was in a British
region in Rymni.
And I
thought, that's my friend
from church. What's she doing here?
I looked again at that.
That's my friend from
round the corner. What's she doing
here? She don't know the girl from the
home stores.
And I looked again.
And my granddaughter came to us.
She said, what are you doing here, Rebecca?
And I looked and said, I don't see my brothers.
And I went, oh my God, I know what happened.
They did a surprise party and they were
all there. They all came round from the back.
Surprise, surprise. I thought, oh,
sugar. Oh.
That was a shock, not a surprise.
So she dug a lot of my friends up
and they were there as well. So that was great.
From the Ivana bakery. From the Ivana
and the Alfa. Right.
Right. Yeah.
So, and I can't even
find those photos.
Were you,
do you think any of the work you did
in manufacturing, was any of it dangerous?
Well, the Ivana could have been
because you're putting your hand in the
machine. And
if that went off, your hand is gone.
So you have to be very careful.
And then,
Were you made aware of? I was.
Of health and safety, were you?
Oh yes, yeah, yeah.
You're shown how to put them on.
And what to look for and
whatever. So that was okay.
Were you aware of anybody who had accidents
while you were working?
Yeah.
There's a good
lot of boy now. He had a finger cut
off in one of the machines.
And that's the only one I know.
I don't know where this girl or a boy
now because it wasn't where I was. It was a different
department. So,
only youngster
it was.
What happened then, do you know?
Well, I suppose they took it to thoughts.
They had to come back and find the other part of the
finger. They found that and
I think they put it back on.
But I thought, I'm glad she
wasn't by me because
they'd have to take two of us to the hospital.
But other than that, nothing
really bad.
Was she given any compensation?
I don't know. That I wouldn't have a clue about.
I should imagine she did.
I'm losing a finger
or part of a finger.
Yeah.
I suppose they did compensation
those days.
Yes.
Okay. I was just going to ask you then.
Did you
enjoy working in
the factories you worked in?
I loved them all.
I bought the Alps biscuits. That's the only one I didn't like.
I liked the laundries.
But it's not the type of
job I wanted to stay in.
You know?
Because I was getting electric shocks off the machines all the time.
So, that wasn't
for me. But I liked
the Alfa,
the dry cleaners,
the Alfa, the dry cleaners
and
Havana.
Havana. And I worked in
Littlewoods. And Freemans?
Freemans.
They were my four best.
Why do you think that was though? Was it job
satisfaction? Or was it
the social interaction?
It was the social. Very friendly people
were working there. The bosses were great.
I mean, when I worked in the Alfa dry cleaners,
we had to go upstairs
and I was working.
I was what they call a spotter.
And as the clothes come up from
being washed come up,
there'd be marks on them. So I'd have a machine
to get the spotter.
There's about five of us on these machines.
Then,
they'd put music on for us
every day, downstairs.
Now, what do you want today?
Frankie Vaughan. You can have him.
I said, well, I want him again today.
Okay. This is for Doreen.
Right?
Then this is for so and so, and this is for so and so.
And they were great. They were great to work for.
Really great.
Well, I used to have some fun down there.
I'd put a Scotch skirt on there.
They'd come up as the little kids when
I was on the barrels
dancing over with this little skirt on.
And there's the two bosses watching me.
But
didn't take any notice. That was okay.
That's Doreen, Arise.
I used to have fun
whichever job I was in.
So, looking back now then,
how, you know, from
many years later, how do you feel about
the time you spent working in
factories?
I feel I'd like my time over again to do
it again. I would
really love to do it all again.
Not the ones now. I don't like
the jobs I've had now. I like them.
But it's not as nice as I had
years ago.
I loved them. I loved every minute
of them. I was lucky to wake up in the
morning and think, I've got work today.
But the weekends, I'd think,
oh, what am I going to do with the weekends?
So we used to go off somewhere.
You know. Better than that,
it was absolutely smashing.
Absolutely. And as I said,
if I could turn the clock back, I'd turn it back to
when I left school.
And start all over again.
But some of the jobs
I wouldn't go to. I just didn't stay longer than the others.
Yeah. Yeah. That's what I would do.
Yeah, it was absolutely
brilliant.
Thank you very much.